# Results

\todo{Write small introduction}

## Unstabilized walking

In this section the results of just playing back the patterns generated by the
pattern generator are presented.
In short, all patterns generated by the Pattern Generate are dynamically stable
and realize walking without falling.
However for some trajectories like walking in a circle, significant deviations can be observed.

### Walking straight

Figure \fixme{ref} shows the simulation of walking straight for 10 steps.
The pattern is \fixme{ref} seconds long.

Figure \fixme{ref} shows the desired ZMP, CoM and foot TCP positions.
The actual realized ZMP, CoM and are shown in figure \fixme{ref}.
The ZMP shown is derived using the Cart-Table model, for a comparison of different
methodes to derive the actual ZMP see \ref{section:multi-body-zmp}.
As you can see the realized ZMP roughly follows the desired trajectory, while the signal is
rather noisy. To get an idea why the ZMP oscillates so much, consider figure \fixme{ref}.
The acceleration of the CoM oscillates wildly. We believe this is caused by the 
the problems outlined in section \ref{section:rigid-body-simulation} about rigid body simulation.
In single support the ZMP oscillates near the boarder of the support polygone, but overall stays inside.

\todo{desired-zmp}
\todo{actual-zmp}
\todo{image-series walking straight (maybe with phantom?)}

### Walking in a circle

Figure \fixme{ref} shows the simulation of walking in a circle.
The robot walks in \fixme{Number of steps} in an arc of 180° and 0.5 m radius.
As you can see the desired 180° turn is not realized completely. Due to the 
chest rotation to follow the trajectory, a torque around the yaw-axis is excerted on the foot.
Recall that during pattern generation we assumed that this torque is zero. Since we do not correct this
disturbance the trajectory deviates significantly in this case.
\todo{read paper about yaw compensation}
However stable walking is still realized as you can see from the desired and actual ZMP and CoM
trajectories in the figures \fixme{ref} and \fixme{ref}.

\todo{desired-zmp}
\todo{actual-zmp}
\todo{image-series walking in a circle}

## Stabilized walking

In this section we present the results of using the alternative stabilizer derived from the Kajita Stabilizer.
As was the case with unstabilized walking, a stable walking trajectory is realized.
Smaller disturbances can be corrected to remain stable.

## Undisturbed walking

Figure \fixme{ref} and \fixme{ref} show the realized ZMP and CoM trajectory of the same for walking straight and in a circle.
As input trajectories for the stabilizer the trajectorie tested in the previous section are used.

The trajectory deviates a little more than it was the case for unstabilized walking.
This is somewhat expected, since the stabilizer modifies the reference trajectory to ensure
the constrains outlined in \ref{section:alternative-approach}.

\todo{actual-zmp-straight}
\todo{actual-zmp-circle}

## Disturbed walking

To test the performance of the stabilizer under disturbance, we used two
scenarios: A short push applied to the chest and slightly sloped ground.
The results are compared with the performance of the unstabilized trajectory.

### Push to the chest

To simulate a push, a ball with a radius of 11cm and weight of 450g (FIFA football) is shoot from
2m distance at the chest. \todo{force is meaningless as we don't know the units. Maybe print ball velocity on impact}
The point of impact is denoted as red lines.

\todo{actual-zmp-stabilized actual-zmp-unstabilized}
\todo{image-series}

